Add a design document for allocator claims. (#79)
microsoft/cheriot-rtos: docs/AllocatorClaims.md

Design of the allocator claims model
====================================

This document describes the design of the claim model that the allocator should provide and how it should be implemented.

The problem
-----------

Consider the scenario where compartment A passes a heap buffer to compartment B.
Another thread executing in compartment A may free the buffer in the middle of B's execution.
This will cause B to fault.

> This is a concurrent operation and so is a classic TOCTOU problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a concurrent operation and so sets the stage for classic TOCTOU problems.
```
as we haven't actually said that B has performed any Checks yet.

 - We assume compartments may be malicious and so they should not be able to trick the allocator into creating a data structure that takes a very large amount of time to walk.

Possible approach 0: Explicit copies
------------------------------------

The first approach is simply to punt on the problem entirely.
When an OS kernel interacts with userspace memory, it calls explicit helpers to copy data to and from the kernel.
This is necessary because the userspace process may provide invalid pointers or update the memory map to invalidate pointers while the kernel runs.

In many situations, the same approach could work with CHERIoT.
We could provide a safe memcpy as a library function that runs with interrupts disabled, checks the source and destination pointers, and then performs the copy (up to some bounded size) and reports whether the copy succeeded.
This would be sufficient in a lot of cases but is not a very friendly programmer model.
In particular, it means that any compartment wrapping existing unmodified code would have to either (deep) copy any objects passed in or would have to make invasive changes to the wrapped code.

> Note: This approach can be orthogonal to others and so we should implement it anyway.

Reviewer: :+1:

Possible approach 1: Hazard pointers
------------------------------------

Hazard pointers provide inspiration for the first possible solution.
This approach involves having a per-compartment list of held objects that the allocator must consult before freeing an object.
The allocator would provide an API that allowed a compartment to register a table containing a (bounded) array of held objects and an allocation capability.

> On deallocation, the allocator would need to traverse all such lists to determine whether an object is on any of them.

Reviewer: This traversal would have to be done with interrupts off.  In LF SMR's use of hazards, there's a global cooperative assumption that threads will not share their local copies of pointers, so that the number of copies of a given pointer in the hazard lists is strictly decreasing with time.  That's not necessarily true of this use of hazards even without considering malice: compartment B might forward a pointer it's holding via a hazard to compartment C, which might then hold it, even after A has attempted to privatize and deallocate it.

> If the object is found on a list then the metadata should be updated to mark it as owned by the allocation capability associated with the list.

Reviewer: Ack; I had a comment here and I'm not sure where it went.  :(

In any case: how is compartment B notified that ownership of the object has transferred from compartment A?  When does either compartment B or the allocator know to free the object?

Author: That's part of the problem.  Logically, as soon as you insert something to a hazard list, you logically own it: it lazily counts towards your quota.  You must ensure that you have sufficient quota for it, but you can't easily query its size.

This is attractive for the fast-path case, because the compartment wishing to claim an object for the duration of a call needs only to insert a pointer to it into a pre-registered array.
It is unclear whether it is possible to use this interface securely.
In particular, a malicious compartment could allocate a large object and pass a pointer to a small sub-object to the callee.

> The callee has no mechanism (other than calling the allocator) to know whether it holds a pointer to an entire object.

Reviewer 2: The allocators traversal could do a subobject check, although we could really do with an `issubset` instruction for that.

Reviewer 3: The CHERIoT `malloc` has no particularly convenient way to map from a sub-object to its allocation, since it's a `dlmalloc`-style inline structure.  It'd be O(n) to walk the heap, uncomfortable with or tricky without holding the lock. :(

Reviewer: Oh, right, yes, I forgot that we marked headers that way.

Possible approach 2: Explicit claims
------------------------------------

The approach in CheriOS is similar to reference counting.
Compartments may explicitly claim memory and objects may not be deallocated until all claims have been dropped.
Importantly, the CheriOS model handles resource constraints: when you claim an object, it counts towards your quota.

The down side of this model is that it requires tracking a lot of state.
Straight reference counting is not sufficient because references can be owned by mutually distrusting entities.
With a simple reference counting model, the original attack is still possible:

1. A allocates an object.
2. A passes a pointer to the object to B.
3. B increments the reference count.
4. A decrements the reference count twice from another thread.
5. B traps.

Each reference to the object is now state that must be tracked and, most likely, will require an allocation.

> We currently have 14 bits spare in the allocation header (slightly more if we shrink the allocator ID, which does not actually require a full 16 bits, since a 16-bit allocator ID would require 2 MiB of RAM to hold all of the corresponding allocation capabilities, leaving no space for the heap) and so could store a heap-start-relative (shifted for alignment) pointer to the head of a linked list of claims.

Reviewer: In the spirit of "O(n) but n is 3", it could suffice to just have a single list of all claims.  If that's too flippant, a small hash table keyed on address could also work.  In either case, we'd just need one bit in the header to bring the (potential) claims to deallocation's attention.

In the common case, this field will be 0 (the start of the heap cannot be allocated) and so free can skip it.

> The proposed solution involves constructing a linked list of structures holding an allocator ID, a saturating reference count, and a next pointer.

Reviewer: What happens on saturation, the object becomes immortal?

Author: Yup, if you claim an object 2^32 times (or possibly 2^16 times), it's yours forever and you get to keep it.

For reference, Smalltalk-80 did the same thing, only with 7, not 2^16, and that worked surprisingly well.
